they're brown dwarf stars as we should
properly call them a very interesting
class of object that we had theorized
about until the last few tens of years
when we've begun to make some
discoveries so just brief recap about
stars stars are giant pressure cookers
carrying out nuclear fusion in their
cores fusing hydrogen the first element
to helium at tremendous pressure and
temperature deep inside the core and
then the heat carries the energy away
and radiates away from the surface see
the stars in different colors when we
look up in the night sky and the color
is a direct reflection of their surface
temperature it also is a reflection
typically of the mass of the star that
the more massive a star is the greater
the internal pressure and temperature in
that nuclear core and so the faster it
carries out the nuclear fusion process
nuclear fusion process is very sensitive
to temperature increases with the fourth
power of the temperature so if you
double the temperature you will make the
fusion happen sixteen times faster it's
a quite incredible relationship and so
more massive stars have the color going
with the temperature as shown here we've
got a few examples with the Sun in the
middle with a surface temperature five
or six thousand degrees and a yellowish
color cooler than that you have orange
or red colors for the surface and hotter
you go white hot or even blue hot for
the colors of the stars now the smallest
types of stars are these little red
dwarfs as we call them we would call our
Sun a yellow dwarf but a red dwarf is
even smaller and cooler and they are the
most common type round about
three quarters of all stars are these
little red dwarf stars major make many
just to make it make many more small
stars than big ones it's much easier for
it to get enough material together
there's a comparison of the size of a
red dwarf star against a picture of our
Sun busily having a solar flare there on
the right taken in ultraviolet light
that one is but nevertheless a yellow
looking color and a red looking color to
the surface of these stars and anything
that's less than half the mass of our
Sun we would call a red dwarf as long as
it's at least 7.5 percent of the mass of
the Sun between those ranges so between
7.5% and 50% the mass of the Sun they
star do get hot enough to form the
temperature you need inside the core of
the star which is 10 million degrees in
order that nuclear fusion can be carried
out properly and so below seven and a
half percent of the mass of the Sun it
doesn't get hot enough in there to
trigger any of the normal nuclear fusion
at all so these red dwarf stars are the
smallest type and they they range from
7.5% to 50% of the mass of the Sun the
ones from 50% upwards we see those as
orange and we call the orange dwarfs so
I referred nuclear fusion going on in
the center this is where hydrogen is
combined in a number of stages to form
the next element helium and the first
stage is to smash two of these little
red dots the protons the simplest
particles together to make a two
particle nucleus of deuterium that's a
heavy isotope of hydrogen then you add a
third one third particle in and you get
three particle nucleus which is helium-3
and you smashed two of those together
and you get helium four
and you get two of your protons back so
you used six protons and you got two
back
consuming four so the four turned into
the one four particle nucleus the blue
particles are neutrons and the process
requires the ability of a proton to turn
into a neutron but that's not really the
whole topic of this talk just want to
give you an overview of the process and
the fact is that you can't get that
first step to work of taking the two
positively charged protons and combining
them together until you get to ten
million degrees this is because they're
both positively charged and they will
repel each other and furiously through
the electrostatic repulsion like charges
repel and so you have to crash them
together very hard indeed in order to
get that first step to happen and each
little step there you get a flash of
energy coming out and it's that energy
that powers the Stars so here's a very
famous little red dwarf star Trappist
one famous because it's got seven
planets all of which looked like roughly
earth-like planets around it but the
star is almost as small as a star can be
it's just eight percent of the mass of
the Sun the limit being seven and a half
as I've said before so much it's smaller
if they've been a little bit less mess
around when it was forming for it to
feed upon then it would have failed to
become a proper star it would not have
lit up fully as a red dwarf it's about
the smallest star we know that's
actually properly carrying out that
nuclear fusion in the middle so what
would have happened if it had been
smaller well here's a picture I took of
Jupiter and very nice image with the red
spots and the cloud belts and so on but
Jupiter is if you like a failed star
it's made of the same stuff that stars
are made of so
95% hydrogen and 24% helium a little bit
of other stuff but it's only got one one
thousandth of the mass of our Sun so you
would need 75 Jupiter's to reach that
seven and a half percent limit and
become the smallest possible proper star
but Jupiter does give out some heat we
detected this back in the 1960s that
Jupiter gave out more heat than it
receives from the Sun and that energy
that's creating that heat is caused by
the contraction of its inner core
falling inwards under gravity still and
any planets or gas giant like this that
forms will have a lot of heat left in it
when it's originally formed as a result
of falling inwards under gravity and
forming the planet in the first place
that's why we have a molten core in the
middle of the earth plus there's a lot
of stuff in the earth that's radioactive
that's trapped and there'll be some of
that in the 1% of Jupiter that's not
hydrogen or helium so two sources of
energy in the middle keeping it a little
bit warm but around about a hundred and
twenty-five degrees above absolute zero
so cold really but slightly warmer than
the cold of space so there are probably
these objects that are between the size
of Jupiter and the size of the star
we've certainly found planets around
other stars that are gas giants bigger
than Jupiter maybe 10 or 20 times the
mass of Jupiter is not uncommon and
these sorts of objects are these failed
stars that form that missing link and
here's the first one that I wanted to
show you as a real system rather than
the artist's impression and this is in a
star called GQ Loop high in the
constellation of Lupus the hair and it's
an orange star
a tight orange star so only 70% the mass
of the Sun for the main star but its
companion they're labeled B it was
imaged in 2005 orbiting around the main
orange dwarf star at 100 astronomical
units so quite at long orbit much three
times as far away from its star as
Neptune is from the Sun and but it's
quite a big object too big really to be
described as a planet
it's 2.6 percent of the mass of our Sun
or 26 Jupiter masses if you prefer to
measure it in terms of how many
Jupiter's it is so a lot bigger than
Jupiter and most recently they found
that this system is even more
complicated they found a more distant
red dwarf orbiting around outside to
2400 now you but that's just beside the
story really there's another one this is
Lisa 2 to 9 B the little tiny bright dot
the main object is Gliese a 2 to 9 a
which is a red dwarf star in itself and
2 to 9 B orbits around it directly
imaged here by the Hubble telescope and
is between 21 and 52 times the mass of
Jupiter so far up to about 5% the mass
of the Sun still too small to be
carrying out that 10 million degree
temperature fusion in the middle of its
core but it is in fact quite warm and it
has its surface temperature of nearly a
thousand degrees Kelvin 950 K so enough
to be glowing very strongly in the
infrared when it is of course an
infrared image that we've used here to
pick it up so where is all the heat
coming from that's keeping that so warm
Oh turns out that above 13 times the
mass of Jupiter the core temperature can
reach 1 million degrees not the 10
million that you need for the first step
of nuclear fusion but enough to trigger
the second step and so the small amount
of natural heavy hydrogen deuterium that
might have been in the composition of
the object in the first place can fuse
with and will fuse with ordinary
hydrogen and release nuclear energy as
there's the second step and form
helium-3 and so that second step is
enough to warm up these and I will call
them brown dwarfs now because this is
what we we now deem to be the limiting
factor for a brown dwarf it must be at
least 13 times the mass of Jupiter and
have at core temperature of 1 million
degrees or more or have had that
temperature at some point sufficient to
trigger this limited deuterium fusion in
the middle now there's not a lot of
deuterium around only one in 10,000
hydrogen atoms from the Big Bang was
formed that way and so it doesn't give
it huge amount of fuel and they burn
through their deuterium fuel quite
quickly but it does heat up the core and
so we fill in the missing link with
these brown dwarfs anything from 13
times the mass of Jupiter to 75 times
the mass of Jupiter is a brown dwarf 75
and above is a star starting with red
dwarfs and then not shown here orange
dwarfs which go from about 500 times the
mass of Jupiter
up to around about 8 or 900 and then you
get to the yellow dwarfs like our Sun
so these are the the missing links in
the chain and if you remember I said
there were a lot more red dwarf stars
than there are of the larger stars and
so it sort of figures that nature would
probably have made a terrific number of
these brown dwarfs if it finds it easy
to make smaller objects and harder to
make big ones you can imagine that there
must be a lot of these brown dwarf stars
out there well here's an another
interesting one it's in the Pleiades
Seven Sisters star cluster just 420
light-years away from us and it weighs
in quite massive at 5.5 percent the mass
of the Sun 57 mj's masses of Jupiter and
has a surface temperature well 2600
degrees Kelvin
that's really quite hot it's almost
going to be glowing into the red but not
quite it's gonna be putting out its
energy in the near infrared part of the
spectrum and the reason is it's carrying
out another nuclear trick it's actually
managing to use the element lithium and
it what it's doing is taking that
lithium crashing it with protons the
ordinary hydrogen atoms and splitting
the results into to helium force so it's
destroying the lithium and turning it
into a pair of the helium's there so
start with a seven particle nucleus and
a one particle nucleus you end up with
two for particle nuclei it makes a huge
sense and normal stars also do this they
burn up all their lithium and destroy it
very rapidly but it turns out that today
one is just above the 5% mass of the Sun
limits where the core temperature gets
to two and a half million degrees and
this creates a lithium fusion trigger
inside the brown dwarf so they get an
extra burst of energy they don't just
the deuterium they also burn up the
lithium as well and so we discovering
that there is more than one type of
these brown dwarfs in there depending on
exactly how massive they are we also
found a third category the ultra cool
brown dwarf and these are ones where
they seem to really have quite low
temperatures so this one's only 500
degrees Kelvin a little bit of warmth
there but not a huge amount and so we
can do a little addition to our diagram
now we've got sun-like stars
we've got Gliese a two to nine a here a
red dwarf Teide one one of these lithium
brown dwarfs leezar two to 9b a
deuterium fusing brown dwarf and then
we've got the ultra cool Weiser one
eight to eight only 500 degrees and then
Jupiter and these images are actually to
scale the size of these objects doesn't
increase very much as they grow in mass
from Jupiter upwards because the you add
mass and what happens is gravity crushes
them to a greater density and heats the
core up a bit more until you get the
nuclear fusion starting to kick off and
then that provides the extra heat for
things to swell up and form a much
larger stable structure we're actually
beginning these brown dwarfs and there's
one here with a thoroughly
unpronounceable name that they've even
detected as having aurora within its
atmosphere so quite incredible that what
we're actually able to measure these
days the Northern Lights on a brown
dwarf 20 light years away we found some
brown dwarf binaries lumens 16 here is a
pair of brown dwarfs orbiting around
each other and there's several other
images of four other brown dwarf
binaries again our Sun is unusual in
that it does not appear to have a binary
companion almost all other stars tend to
be in twos or threes or groups and
single stars are quite rare
we also found brown dwarfs with dust
disks around them we think a dust disc
is the origin of the planets in our
solar system but of the early Sun would
have had a dust ring around it left over
from its formation and out of which the
planets were born and we think there's
no difference really with smaller stars
we saw that Trappist one had got a
family of seven planets well indeed here
is a the idea that brown dwarfs can
exist if strings and even we think in
this image here we've detected a
planetary companion to a brown dwarf in
the image there and I think the best
image is this one was the first image of
a planet outside of our solar system
the yt blue object is the brown dwarf
and then as a planet be orbiting around
it which is only eight times the mass of
Jupiter so it's a little system in its
own right 40 light-years away and the
ratio of the masses between the main
object which is this brand off and the
jupiter-like planet there's only three
to one so quite incredible mixture of
different types of systems
okay so habitable zone of a brown dwarf
we have a habitable zone around our star
we live in it that's probably a good job
where it's not too hot it's not too cold
it's just right the Goldilocks zone and
all stars have
that and we are very keen on finding
planets that live within the habitable
zone of their stars now brown dwarf
which is giving off some heat but it
probably doesn't give off heat for very
long and a stable temperature if there
is a burst of nuclear fusion early in
its existence that'll soon run out of
fuel and then the star will be doomed to
cool over time as it's not releasing new
energy in the center and so the
habitable zone around it will narrow and
shrink you'll have to keep getting
closer and closer to it to get enough
warmth to keep any water liquid and so
I'm not sure that these brown dwarfs are
necessarily the perfect candidate for
looking for any sort of life on planets
orbitting brown dwarfs another
possibility that some of these systems
may contain planets of a rather unusual
type that we've not discovered any of
these yet but the hypothesis is that you
could get carbon planets around brown
dwarfs that would be very dry the water
would be driven away by all of the
initial burst of heat and locked up out
in a sort of mini Oort cloud of icy
cometary type objects but without any
giant planets to then change things and
disturb those comets to fall back in the
water wouldn't be redeliver Dazz it
probably was on earth back to create
oceans and so you'd find that your
planet would have a very much larger
percentage of carbon compared to oxygen
because it wouldn't get the water re
delivered back as h2o
so we're very interested in looking to
see if we can detect the signature of
any of these carbon planets now I
mentioned that the Sun a soul star
doesn't appear to have a companion
and the question I suppose is could it
have a brown dwarf companion that we
failed to spot due to it being rather
faint and dim object we might have
overlooked it well I think the answer is
no because we've done fairly extensive
surveys the theory he around at one
point called the Nemesis hypothesis that
maybe the 26 million year pattern of
extinctions that we seem to see in the
fossil record might be because we have a
companion red or brown dwarf orbiting
the Sun in a very long thin orbit that's
currently a long way away and might
periodically disturb objects in the
Kuiper belt and hurl a shower of
collects our way and cause the mass
extinctions on the earth
we've looked very very hard for this
object using infrared telescopes that
should be able to see anything even a
cool brown dwarf and the range of
possible sizes for such an object and
distances is definitely going down and
down all the time so if prettier sure
it's not there but we haven't managed to
rule out every possible scenario yet